# Introduction

This is the beginning of a work-in-progress book, *Learning
TidalCycles*. Feedback is very welcome!

This is something I've wanted to write for a long time - a complete
guide to TidalCycles. I can't promise that I'll ever finish it, but
you can make that much more likely by sending coffee! You can do that
here: [https://ko-fi.com/yaxulive/](https://ko-fi.com/yaxulive/])

*This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International License.*

## What is TidalCycles? 

TidalCycles, or just _Tidal_ for short, is a language environment for
exploring pattern. It's known as a live coding environment (see
below), and often used in dance music contexts, but really can be
applied to anything pattern-related, whether repetitive dance music,
abstract minimalist music, weird electroacoustic music, or outside the
world of music completely - people have used Tidal to make video art,
choreograph dance, and even pattern textiles.

Pattern is central to Tidal, so lets have a go at defining it. In
music, any sequence is often called a 'pattern', if it gets
_repeated_. But there's a lot more to explore pattern than
repetition. Think about patterns in textiles - you get a lot of
repeating patterns, but also _reflecting_ patterns creating symmetry,
_fractal_ patterns playing with similarity at different scales,
_interference_ patterns between different elements. And then you get
_glitched_ patterns, where expectations set up by a pattern are
confounded through 'errors', often introduced on purpose. All these
kinds of patternings can be explored with Tidal, and more.

## Live coding and embracing error

Live coding, as a community and movement, has been around since around
the year 2000, giving itself the name TOPLAP at the first
international meeting in Hamburg in 2004. As a practice, live coding
arose from a few different places at once, perhaps in reaction to the
increasingly slick 'seamlessness' of music software, as well as a
ressurgence of 'creative coding' as a means to make art. "Instead of
using prewritten software in the studio, why not write software from
scratch on stage?"  A pretty strange idea, but it worked out pretty
well, live coding has turned into a world-wide movement, with a wide
range of live coding environments and technologies for the live
performing arts.^[Check the long list of technologies in the TOPLAP
"All things Live Coding" page here:
https://github.com/toplap/awesome-livecoding]

Tidal was originally made for live coding, but that doesn't have to
involve being in front of a live audience. Many prefer to write code
alone in the studio, and only share it if/when they feel it's
ready. They might then perform with it by manipulating and tweaking
the code, rather than writing it from scratch. That is of course
completely fine, it's totally up to you how you fit Tidal into your
workflow and life.

Still, Tidal's focus on patternings does encourage a certain kind of
approach. If you come to Tidal with fixed ideas, you might get
frustrated. When you're working with pattern, you might have three or
four layers of manipulations going on, resulting in strange
interactions going on that can make it difficult to predict exactly
what will happen when you make a change on a particular layer. However
if you're happy to embrace a little uncertainty, you'll get a tacit
understanding for Tidal patterns, and get a feel for high level
control of it's expansive possibilities.

